# Introduction to Statistics Note

*2024 Spring Semester*

$\text{21 CST H3Art}$

## Chapter 1: Looking at Data——Distributions

### 1.1 Data

**Statistics（统计学）** is the science of learning from data.

**Cases（案例）** are the objects described by a set of data. Cases may be customers, companies, experimental subjects, or other objects.

A **variable（变量）** is a special characteristic of a case.

A **label（标签）** is used in some data sets to provide additional information about a variable.

Different cases can have different **values** of a variable.

A **categorical（分类的）** variable places each case into one of several groups, or categories. Sometimes also referred to as a nominal variable (i.e., used for naming). Example: first language, ethnicity.

A **quantitative（定量的）** variable takes numerical values for which arithmetic operations such as adding and averaging make sense.

The **distribution** of a variable tells us the values that a variable takes and how often it takes each value.

### 1.2 Displaying Distributions with Graphs

The distribution of a **categorical variable（分类变量）** lists the categories and gives the **count** or **percent** of individuals who fall into each category:
- **Pie charts（饼图）** show the distribution of a categorical variable as a “pie” whose slices are sized by the **counts** or **percents** for the categories.
- **Bar graphs（条形图：条一般分开来）** represent categories as bars whose heights show the category counts or percents.

The distribution of a **quantitative variable（定量变量）** tells us what values the variable takes on and how often it takes those values:
- **Histograms（直方图：条一般连在一起）** show the distribution of a quantitative variable by using bars. The height of a bar represents the number of individuals whose values fall within the corresponding class.
- **Stemplots（茎叶图）** (or **stem-and-leaf plots**) separate each observation into a stem and a leaf that are then plotted to display the distribution while maintaining the original values of the variable.

A distribution is **symmetric** if the right and left sides (or tails) of the graph are approximately mirror images of each other.

A distribution is **skewed to the right** (**right-skewed**) if the right side of the graph (containing the half of the observations with larger values) is much longer than the left side.

It is skewed to the **left** (**left-skewed**) if the left side of the graph is much longer than the right side.

An important kind of deviation is an **outlier（离群值）**. Outliers are observations that lie outside the overall pattern of a distribution.

### 1.3 Describing Distributions with Numbers

The most common measure of center (or central tendency) is the **arithmetic average（算术平均值）**, or **mean（均值）**.

$$
\bar{x} = \frac{\text{sum of observations}}{n} = \frac{x_1+x_2+\cdots+x_n}{n} = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^nx_i = \frac{1}{n}\sum x_i
$$

The **median** is the midpoint of a distribution, the number such that half of the observations are smaller and the other half are larger.

The **mean** and **median** of a roughly **symmetric** distribution are close together. If the distribution is exactly **symmetric**, the mean and median are exactly **the same**.

In a **skewed distribution**, the **mean** is usually **farther out in the long tail（均值趋向于长尾方向）** than is the median.

A measure of center alone can be **misleading**. And a useful numerical description of a distribution requires **both a measure of center and a measure of spread** (or variability), so we introduce **quartiles（分位点）**:
- Arrange the observations in increasing order and locate the **median** $M$.
- The **first quartile** $Q_1$ is the median of the observations located to the left of the median in the ordered list.
- The **third quartile** $Q_3$ is the median of the observations located to the right of the median in the ordered list.
- The **interquartile range** ($\text{IQR}$) is defined as: $\text{IQR} = Q_3 – Q_1$.

The **five-number summary** of a distribution consists of the **smallest observation**, the **first quartile**, the **median**, the **third quartile**, and the **largest observation**, written in order from smallest to largest:

$$
\min\space Q_i \space M \space Q_3 \space \max
$$

The median and quartiles divide the distribution roughly into quarters. This leads to a new way to display quantitative data, the **boxplot**:
- Draw and label a number line that includes the range of the distribution.
- Draw a central box from $Q_1$ to $Q_3$.
- Note the **median** $M$ inside the box.
- Extend lines (whiskers) from the box out to the **minimum** and **maximum** values that are **not outliers**.

**The $1.5 \times \text{IQR}$ Rule for Outliers**: Call an observation an outlier if it falls more than $1.5 \times \text{IQR}$ **above the third quartile** or **below the first quartile**.

The most common measure of spread looks at how far each observation is from the mean. This measure is called the **standard deviation**($s_x$).

$$
\text{variance} = s_x^2 = \frac{(x_1 - \bar{x})^2 + \cdots + (x_n - \bar{x})^2}{n-1} = \frac{1}{n-1}\sum(x_i - \bar{x})^2
$$

$$
\text{standard deviation} = s_x = \sqrt{\frac{1}{n-1}\sum(x_i - \bar{x})^2}
$$

$s_x$ measures spread about the mean and should be used only when the **mean** is **the measure of center（仅当均值为测量值的中心时适用）**.

$s_x$ is **not** resistant to outliers.**（无法对抗离群值）**

Numerical summaries do not fully describe the shape of a distribution.  

$$
\text{ALWAYS  PLOT  YOUR  DATA!}
$$

**Changing the Unit of Measurement**:
- **Multiplying** each observation by a positive number $b$ multiplies both **measures of center (mean, median)** and **spread** ($\text{IQR}$, $s_x$) by $b$.
- **Adding** the same number $a$ (positive or negative) to each observation adds $a$ to **measures of center** and to **quartiles**, but it does **not** change measures of spread ($\text{IQR}$, $s_x$).

### 1.4 Density Curves and Normal Distributions

A **density curve（密度曲线）** is a curve that:
- is always **on** or **above** the horizontal axis
- has an **area** of exactly $1$ underneath it

Distinguishing the **Median** and **Mean** of a **Density Curve**:
- The **median** of a density curve is the **equal-areas point**——the point that divides the area under the curve in half.
- The **mean** of a density curve is the **balance point**, that is, the point at which the curve would balance if made of solid material.
- The **mean** of a **skewed curve** is **pulled away from the median** in the direction of the **long tail**. **（均值在倾斜曲线中总是更偏向长尾一端）**

A **Normal distribution** is described by a **Normal density curve**. Any particular Normal distribution is completely specified by two numbers: its **mean** $µ$ and **standard deviation** $σ$.
- The **mean** of a Normal distribution is the center of the symmetric Normal curve. 
- We abbreviate the Normal distribution with mean $µ$ and standard deviation $σ$ as $N(µ,σ)$.

**The 68-95-99.7 Rule**:
- Approximately $68\%$ of the observations fall within $σ$ of $µ$.
- Approximately $95\%$ of the observations fall within $2σ$ of $µ$.
- Approximately $99.7\%$ of the observations fall within $3σ$ of $µ$.

If a variable $x$ has a distribution with **mean** $µ$ and **standard deviation** $σ$, then the standardized value of $x$, or its $z$-score, is:

$$
z = \frac{x - \mu}{\sigma}
$$

The **standard Normal distribution（标准正态分布）** is the Normal distribution with **mean** $0$ and **standard deviation** $1$.

One way to assess if a distribution is indeed approximately Normal is to plot the data on a **Normal quantile plot**.
- If the distribution is indeed Normal, the plot will show a **straight line**, indicating a **good match** between the data and a Normal distribution.
- Systematic **deviations** from a straight line indicate a **non-Normal distribution**.
- **Outliers** appear as points that are far away from the overall pattern of the plot.
