# Introduction to Statistics Note

*2024 Spring Semester*

$\text{21 CST H3Art}$

## Chapter 3: Producing Data

### 3.1 Sources of Data

**Anecdotal data（轶事数据）** represent individual cases that often come to our attention because they are striking in some way. "The plural of **anecdote** is not evidence."

**Sample surveys** are a special type of **designed experiment** that usually aim to discover the opinions of people on certain topics. In a sample survey, a **sample** of individuals is selected from a larger **population** of individuals. 

The **distinction** between **observational study（观察研究）** and **experiment（实验）** is one of the most important in statistics:
- An **observational study** observes individuals and measures variables of interest but **does not attempt to influence the responses**.
- An **experiment** deliberately **imposes some treatment** on individuals to measure their responses.

Observational studies of the effect of one variable on another often **fail** because of **confounding** between the explanatory variable and one or more **lurking variables**:
- **Confounding（混淆）** occurs when two variables are associated in such a way that **their effects** on a response variable **cannot be distinguished** from each other.
- A **lurking variable（潜在变量）** is a variable that is **not among the explanatory or response variables** in a study but that may influence the response variable.

### 3.2 Design of Experiments

An **experiment** is a study in which we actually do something (a **treatment**) to people, animals, or objects (the **experimental units**) to observe the **response**.

An **experimental unit** is the smallest **entity** to which a **treatment is applied**.
- When the units are **human beings**, they are often called **subjects（主体）**.

The **explanatory variables** in an experiment are often called **factors（因子）**.

A specific condition applied to the individuals in an experiment is called a **treatment**.

Many laboratory experiments operate as follows:

$$
\text{Experimental Units}\rightarrow\text{Treatment}\rightarrow\text{Measure Response}
$$

Outside the laboratory, **badly designed experiments** often **yield worthless results（产生无价值的结果）** because of **confounding（混淆）**.

In a **comparative experiment**, **comparison alone** isn’t enough. If the treatments are given to groups that differ greatly, **bias（偏差）** will result. The **solution** to the problem of bias is **random assignment（随机分配）**.

In a **completely randomized** design, the treatments are assigned to all the experimental units completely by chance. Some experiments may include a **control group（控制变量组）** that **receives an inactive treatment（接受不明显的对待）** or an existing **baseline treatment**.

**How to randomly choose n individuals from a group of $N$**:
- We first label each of the $N$ individuals with a number (typically from $1$ to $N$, or $0$ to $N − 1$).
- Imagine writing the whole numbers from $1$ to $N$ on separate pieces of paper. Now put all the numbers in a hat.
- Mix up the numbers and randomly select one.
- Mix up the remaining $N − 1$ numbers and randomly select one of them.
- Continue in this way until we have our sample of $n$ numbers.

**Principles of Experimental Design**:
- **Control** for lurking variables that might affect the response, most simply by comparing two or more treatments. **（控制潜在变量）**
- **Randomize**: Use chance to assign experimental units to treatments. **（使对待随机化）**
- **Replication**: Use enough experimental units in each group to reduce chance variation in the results.**（复制实验，足够多的实验才有说服力）**

An observed effect so large that it would rarely occur by chance is called **statistically significant（统计显著性）**.

A **statistically significant association（统计上的显著关联）** in data from a **well-designed experiment** does imply **causation（因果关系）**.

In a **double-blind experiment（双盲实验）**, neither the **subjects** nor those **who interact with them** and measure the response variable **know which treatment a subject received**. **（被试者和实验者均不知道他们做了什么操作）**

A **matched pairs（配对）** design is a **randomized blocked experiment** in which each block consists of a **matching pair of similar experimental units**.

A **block** is **a group of experimental units** that are known before the experiment to be **similar** in some way that is expected to affect the response to the treatments. 

### 3.3 Sampling Design

The **population** in a statistical study is the **entire group of individuals** about which we want information.

A **sample** is the part of the population from which we actually collect information. 

The design of a **sample** is **biased** if it **systematically favors** certain outcomes.**（系统性地偏向某些结果）**

A **voluntary response sample（自愿响应样本）** consists of people who choose themselves by responding to a general appeal. Voluntary response samples often show bias because people with strong opinions (often in the same direction) may be more likely to respond.

A **simple random sample （简单随机抽样）(SRS)** of size $n$ consists of $n$ individuals from the population chosen in such a way that every set of $n$ individuals has an equal chance to be the sample actually selected.

A **probability sample** is a sample chosen by chance. We must know what samples are possible and what chance, or probability, each possible sample has.

To select a **stratified random sample（分层随机抽样）**, first classify the population into groups of similar individuals, called **strata（阶层）**. Then choose a separate SRS in each stratum and combine these SRSs to form the full sample.

**Systematic sample（系统抽样）** arranges the units in the population in a certain order, **determine the selection interval** according to the sample size requirements, and select a unit at certain intervals.

Good sampling technique includes the art of reducing all sources of **error**:
- **Undercoverage（覆盖不足）** occurs when some groups in the population are left out of the process of choosing the sample.
- **Nonresponse（无响应）** occurs when an individual chosen for the sample can't be contacted or refuses to participate.
- A systematic pattern of incorrect responses in a sample survey leads to **response bias（响应偏差）**.
- The **wording of questions（问题措辞）** is the most important influence on the answers given to a sample survey.

### 3.4 Toward Statistical Inference

A **parameter（参数）** is a number that describes some characteristic of the population.**（描述总体）**

A **statistic（统计量）** is a number that describes some characteristic of a sample.**（描述样本）**

We write **$µ$ (the Greek letter mu)** for the **population mean** and $σ$ for the population standard deviation. 

We write **$\bar{x}$ (x-bar)** for the **sample mean** and $s$ for the sample standard deviation.

The **population distribution** of a variable is the distribution of values of the variable among all individuals in the population.

The **sampling distribution** of a **statistic** is the distribution of values taken by the statistic in all possible samples of the same size from the same population.

**Bias（偏差）** concerns the **center of the sampling distribution**. A **statistic** used to estimate a **parameter** is **unbiased**.
- To reduce bias, use **random sampling（随机抽样）**.

The **variability（变化性）** of a **statistic** is described by **the spread of its sampling distribution**.
- To reduce variability of a statistic from an SRS, use a **larger sample（更大的样本）**.

The process of drawing **conclusions about a population** on the basis of **sample data** is called **inference**.
