# Introduction to Statistics Note

*2024 Spring Semester*

$\text{21 CST H3Art}$

## Chapter 13: Two-Way Analysis of Variance

### 13.1 The Two-Way ANOVA Model

**Two-Way Designs（双因子）**

In a two-way design, **two factors (independent variables)** are studied in **conjunction（结合）** with **the response (dependent) variable**. There are thus two ways of organizing the data, as shown in a two-way table.

When the dependent variable is **quantitative**, the data are **analyzed with a two-way ANOVA procedure**. A **chi-square test** is used instead if the dependent variable is **categorical**. **（当因变量是定量的时，使用双向方差分析分析数据。如果因变量是分类变量，则使用卡方检验）**

**Two-Way ANOVA（双因子方差分析）**
- It is **more efficient to study two factors at once（同时研究两个因子更有效）** than separately.
  - A two-way design requires smaller sample sizes per condition than does a series of one-way designs because the samples for all levels of factor $\textbf{B}$ contribute to sampling for factor $\textbf{A}$. **（与一系列单向设计相比，双向设计每个条件所需的样本量更小，因为因子$\textbf{B}$所有级别的样本都有助于因子$\textbf{A}$的采样。）**
- Including a second factor thought to influence the response variable helps reduce the residual variation in a model of the data.
  - In a **one-way ANOVA** for factor $\textbf{A}$, any effect of factor $\textbf{B}$ is assigned to the $\textbf{residual}$ ($\textbf{``error"}$ term). In a **two-way ANOVA**, **both factors** contribute to the $\textbf{``fit"}$ part of the model.
- **Interactions between factors（因子间相互作用）** can be investigated.
  - The two-way ANOVA breaks down the fit part of the model between each of the **main components (the two factors)** and an **interaction effect**. The interaction cannot be tested with a series of one-way ANOVAs. **（交互作用无法被单因子方差分析测试）**

**The Two-Way ANOVA Model**

- We record a quantitative variable in a two-way design with **$I$ levels of factor $\textbf{A}$** and **$J$ levels of factor $\textbf{B}$**.

- There are $I × J$ combinations of the two sets of factor levels. We'll use $(i,j)$ to denote the population for which **factor $\textbf{A}$ is at level $i$** and **factor $\textbf{B}$ is at level $j$**.

- We assume that we have **$I × J$ independent SRSs**, one from each population, and that each population is **Normal**. The **population means may be different** but **all populations have the same $σ$**.

- Let $x_{ijk}$ represent the $k$-th observation from population $(i,j)$. The statistical model is:
$$
\begin{align}
    x_{ijk} &= \mu_{ij} &+ \varepsilon_{ijk} \nonumber\\
    &= \mu + \alpha_i + \beta_j + (\alpha\beta)_{ij} &+ \varepsilon_{ijk} \nonumber
\end{align}
$$
where **$μ_{ij}$ is the mean of population $(i,j)$** and **$ε_{ijk}$ is an error term**. 
$μ_{ij}$, the mean of combination $(i,j)$, **can be broken down into** the **overall mean $μ$**, **plus $α_i$**, the effect of level $i$ of Factor $\textbf{A}$, **plus $β_i$**, the effect of level $j$ of Factor $\textbf{B}$, **plus $(αβ)_{ij}$**, the interaction effect of the two levels

**Interaction（相互作用）**: Two variables interact if a particular combination of variables leads to results that **would not be anticipated on the basis of the main effects of those variables（根据这些变量的主要影响却无法被预期的的结果）**. An interaction implies that the effect of one variable is different at different levels of another variable.

**Main Effects（主要影响）**: This is the impact on the response (dependent variable) of varying levels of that factor, **regardless of the other factor** (i.e., pooling together the levels of the other factor). **（只却决于单个解释变量的变化水平）**
- When there is **no clear interaction**, the **main effects are enough** to describe the data. In the **presence of interaction**, the **main effects could mask what is really going on with the data**.

In a two-way design, statistical significance can be found for each factor, for the interaction effect, or for any combination of these:

|Neither factor is significant|Neither factor is significant|Only one factor is significant|Both factors are significant|
|-|-|-|-|
|No interaction|Interaction effect is significant|No interaction|With or without significant interaction|

### 13.2 Inference for Two-Way ANOVA

**Inference for Two-Way ANOVA（双因子方差分析推断）**:
- A one-way ANOVA tests the following model of your data:
$$
\textbf{data(``Total")} = \textbf{fit(``Groups")} + \textbf{residual(``Error")}
$$
so that the sums of squares and degrees of freedom are:
$$
\begin{align}
    \textbf{SST} &= \textbf{SSG} + \textbf{SSE} \nonumber\\
    \textbf{DFT} &= \textbf{DFG} + \textbf{DFE} \nonumber
\end{align}
$$
- When the **sample sizes are equal（样本大小相同）**, a two-way design breaks down the "fit" part of the model into more specific subcomponents, so that:
$$
\begin{align}
    \textbf{SST} &= \textbf{SSA} + \textbf{SSB} + \textbf{SSAB} + \textbf{SSE} \nonumber\\
    \textbf{DFT} &= \textbf{DFA} + \textbf{DFB} + \textbf{DFAB} + \textbf{DFE} \nonumber
\end{align}
$$
where $\mathbf{A}$ and $\mathbf{B}$ are the two **main effects** from each of the two factors, and $\mathbf{AB}$ represents the **interaction** of factors $\mathbf{A}$ and $\mathbf{B}$.

**The Two-Way ANOVA Table（双因子方差分析表）**
|Source of variation|$df$|Sum of Square $\textbf{SS}$|Mean Square $\textbf{MS}$|$F$|P-value|
|-|-|-|-|-|-|
|Factor $\mathbf{A}$|$\mathbf{DFA} = I - 1$|$\textbf{SSA}$|$\textbf{MSA} = \textbf{SSA}/\mathbf{DFA}$|$F_\mathbf{A} = \textbf{MSA}/\textbf{MSE}$|for $F_\mathbf{A}$|
|Factor $\mathbf{B}$|$\mathbf{DFB} = J - 1$|$\textbf{SSB}$|$\textbf{MSB} = \textbf{SSB}/\mathbf{DFB}$|$F_\mathbf{B} = \textbf{MSB}/\textbf{MSE}$|for $F_\mathbf{B}$|
|Interaction|$\mathbf{DFAB} = (I - 1)(J - 1)$|$\textbf{SSAB}$|$\textbf{MSAB} = \textbf{SSAB}/\mathbf{DFAB}$|$F_\mathbf{AB} = \textbf{MSAB}/\textbf{MSE}$|for $F_\mathbf{AB}$|
|Error|$\textbf{DFE} = N - IJ$|$\textbf{SSE}$|$\textbf{MSE} = \textbf{SSE}/\textbf{DFE}$|||
|Total|$\textbf{DFT} = N - 1 =\textbf{DFA}+\textbf{DFB}+\textbf{DFAB}+\textbf{DFE}$|$\textbf{SST} =\textbf{SSA}+\textbf{SSB}+\textbf{SSAB}+\textbf{SSE}$||||

- **Main effects（主要效应）**: P-value for factor $\textbf{A}$, P-value for factor $\textbf{B}$.
- **Interaction**: P-value for the interaction effect of $\textbf{A}$ and $\textbf{B}$.
- **Error**: Represents variability in the measurements within the groups.
- $\textbf{MSE}$ is an unbiased estimate of the population variance $\sigma^2$.

**Cautions for Two-Way ANOVA（双因子方差分析注意事项）**:
1. Always **construct a plot of factor level means（构建因子水平均值图）**. Examine for possible interaction.
2. **Examine the test for interaction first（首先检验交互作用）**. Presence of a strong interaction may influence the interpretation of the main effects. **（强相互作用的存在可能会影响主要效应的解释）**
3. When an interaction is present, carefully examine the means to properly interpret the data. **（当存在相互作用时，需要仔细检验均值以合理解释数据）**
    - The marginal means do not tell the whole story **（边界均值不能说明所有情况）**
    - An examination of treatment means may provide a better interpretation than the ANOVA F tests for main effects. (A treatment mean is the mean response to a particular combination of factor levels.)**（对措施均值的检验也许会提供比ANOVA F检验更好的对主要效应的解释，因为采取某种措施的均值是特定因素水平组合下的响应均值，其可以更好地解释主要效应）**
